Wavelength calibration from 1 − 5µm for the CRIRES+

high-resolution spectrograph at the VLT

U. Seemann*,a, G. Anglada-Escudéa, D. Baadeb, P. Bristowb, R. J. Dornb, R. Follertc, D.

Gojakb, J. Grunhutb, A. P. Hatzesc, U. Heiterd, D. I. Ivesb, P. Jeepa, Y. Jungb, H.-U. Käuflb,

F. Kerberb, B. Kleinb, J.-L. Lizonb, M. Lockhartd, T. Löwingerc, T. Marquartd, E. Olivae, J.

Paufiquéb, N. Piskunovd, E. Poznab, A. Reinersa, A. Smetteb, J. Smokerb, E. Stempelsd, E.

Valentib

aGeorg-August Universität Göttingen, Institut für Astrophysik, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1,

D-37077 Göttingen, Germany;

bEuropean Southern Observatory, Karl Schwarzschild Str. 2, D-85748 Garching, Germany;

cThüringer Landessternwarte Tautenburg, Sternwarte 5, D-07778 Tautenburg, Germany;

dUppsala Universitet, Department for Physics and Astronomy, Box 515, 751 20 Uppsala,

Sweden;

eINAF-Arcetri Observatory, Largo E. Fermi 5, I-50125 Firenze, Italy

ABSTRACT

CRIRES at the VLT is one of the few adaptive optics enabled instruments that offer a resolving power of 105

from 1 − 5 µm. An instrument upgrade (CRIRES+) is proposed to implement cross-dispersion capabilities,

spectro-polarimetry modes, a new detector mosaic, and a new gas absorption cell. CRIRES+ will boost the

simultaneous wavelength coverage of the current instrument (∼ λ/70 in a single-order) by a factor of & 10

in the cross-dispersed configuration, while still retaining a 10 arcsec slit suitable for long-slit spectroscopy.

CRIRES+ dramatically enhances the instrument’s observing efficiency, and opens new scientific opportunities.

These include high-precision radial-velocity studies on the 3 m/s level to characterize extra-solar planets and their

athmospheres, which demand for specialized, highly accurate wavelength calibration techniques. In this paper,

we present a newly developed absorption gas-cell to enable high-precision wavelength calibration for CRIRES+.

We also discuss the strategies and developments to cover the full operational spectral range (1−5 µm), employing

hollow-cathode emission lamps, Fabry-Pérot étalons, and absorption gas-cells.

Keywords: astronomical instrumentation, infrared spectrographs, high spectral resolution, upgrade of existing

VLT instruments, infrared spectrometers, wavelength calibration, radial-velocities, extra-solar planets

1. INTRODUCTION

The CRyogenic high-resolution InfraRed Echelle Spectrograph (CRIRES3) is installed on UT1 (Antu) of ESO’s

Very Large Telescope (VLT), and is in operation since 2006. The spectrograph features a nominal resolving

power of R = 105 (using a 0.2′′ slit) over the entire 1 − 5 µm near-infrared (NIR) wavelength domain. CRIRES

is equipped with a MACAO4 adaptive optics module to enhance the energy concentration within the 0.2 × 30

arcsec slit. A single order is dispersed on a focal plane mosaic of 4 1k x 1k InSb Aladdin detectors,5 resulting in

a simultanous wavelength coverage of about λ/70 (at 1µm) to λ/50 (at 5µm).

The CRIRES upgrade project aims to increase the observing efficiency of the instrument, transforming it

into a cross-dispersed echelle spectrograph with new capabilities, termed “CRIRES+”. The major changes

implemented by the upgrade comprise a cross-dispersion unit in place of the existing prism pre-disperser, a

new focal plane array of 3 HAWAII-2RG 2k×2k IR detectors, introduction of a new spectro-polarimeter, and

additional means of wavelength calibration to enable high-precision velocimetry using a gas-absorption cell. The

Further author information:

* e-mail: seemann@astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de



Figure 1. Optical layout of the upgraded CRIRES, termed “CRIRES+”. The instrument itself is located in a cryostat (dark

shaded area), interfaced by a dichroic entrance window. The upgraded optics1, 2 consist of cross-dispersion capabilities (via

a grating wheel), camera, and a new 3-chip detector mosaic. The adaptive optics module, the instrument derotator, and

calibration devices are comprised in a warm part between the telescope and the spectrograph (light grey area). Wavelength

calibration sources are inserted into the optical beam just after the telescope. This is where the new absorption gas-cell

is mounted (red cylinder), as well as feeds for emission line lamps, étalons, and a polarimeter.

Figure 2. ThAr catalog8 (top) and corresponding histogram (bottom) of lines used for the standard CRIRES(+) wavelength

calibration. The density of availabe lines rapidly decreases towards longer wavelengths, rendering ThAr unsuitable as a

calibration source for the entire NIR range. ThAr lines greatly vary in intensity, so that effectively only a subset can be

used.

CRIRES+ project and its main components are further described elsewhere in these proceedings.1, 2, 6, 7 Figure 1

shows an overview of the new optical layout of CRIRES+ and its main components.

This paper focuses on the new absorption gas-cell for CRIRES+, and outlines the wavelength calibration strat-

egy for CRIRES+ comprised of various reference sources. It is organized as follows: §2 describes the wavelength

calibration in the NIR and the currently used techniques with CRIRES. In §3, we present a newly developed

gas-cell for precision calibration with CRIRES+, and discuss its design, construction, and characterization. The

concept for wavelength calibrators with CRIRES+ is described in §4. Concluding remarks are provided in §5.

2. WAVELENGTH CALIBRATION IN THE NIR

High-resolution spectroscopy demands for precise wavelength calibrators. The well established technique in the

optical domain using commercially available hollow-cathode lamps (HCLs) such as ThAr provides unresolved

emission lines even at the high spectral resolving power of 100 000 offered by CRIRES. ThAr as the default

wavelength reference for optical spectrographs can provide a line position accuracy9 of 16 − 82 m/s and up to

∼ 10 m/s with carefully selected lines10 in the 400 − 700 nm range for single lines. In a stable environment, ThAr

is thus suitable for high-precision applications such as doppler measurements on the m/s scale using large echelle

formats. Blended lines and large intensity differences between the metal lines and the lines originating from the

fill gas can be handled by careful selection and masking during calibration, however, two major problems exist

with HCLs. First, HCLs are intrinsically unstable as their individual line intensities vary from lamp to lamp, and

are a function of age, pressure, and operating current. These effects degrade the stability as a reference source.

Over their lifetime, the gas pressure inside a HCL decreases, resulting in wavelength changes of the gas lines.

The metal lines change in intensities as cathode material is sputtered off, and the geometry of the cathode thus

depends on lamp age. Accordingly, the illumination of the instrument by the HCL varies over time. Secondly,



Figure 3. Absorption spectrum of the CRIRES N2O gas-cell3 in the near-infrared K–L bands. N2O offers a number of

transition bands redwards of 2µm as a wavelength reference in selected, small wavelength regions.

ThAr does not exhibit a homogenous density of spectral features in terms of wavelength. While the line density

is high in the optical (λ < 1µm), atomic transitions become infrequent at longer wavelengths. In the NIR, the

line density of ThAr decreases so that it is not suitable to provide a wavelength solution for CRIRES beyond

∼ 2.5µm.11 Nevertheless, a ThAr HCL is a CRIRES general purpose wavelength reference from 0.95 − 2.5µm,

and yields a level of ∼ 50 m/s precision for the line positions. Fig. 2 shows the ThAr emission lines for calibrating

CRIRES+ spectra.

As with all NIR spectrographs, wavelength solutions for CRIRES at longer wavelengths rely on sky emission

lines, telluric absorption lines, and absorption lines by specialized gases enclosed in reference gas cells. While the

hydroxyl night-time airglow (OH) is present over a wide wavelength region in the NIR12 and well characterized,13

at R = 105 these features are mostly too weak and too infrequent to provide a generally reliable wavelength

standard for CRIRES(+). Similarly, molecules present in earth’s athmosphere provide a multitude of absorption

lines across the NIR, dominated by the strong absorber H2O, among others, whose transition bands define the

boundaries of the band passes. The presence and strength of telluric calibrators, however, are strongly site-

dependent and prone to variations on different timescales from hours to years. Thus, a detailed understanding

and modelling of the atmospheric conditions, based on simultaneously measured sounding data, is required, as

eg. high-altitude winds induce significant uncertainties (≤ 25m/s) on the line positions.8 Telluric molecules such

as CO2 can be used with CRIRES and have demonstrated radial velocity precisions of 5 − 10 m/s,14 but are

restricted to narrow wavelength intervals.

The benefits of the wavelength calibration technique using telluric features can be mimicked by exploiting

ro-vibration lines from a selected molecular gas. Such a captive gas (or a mixture of several) is then kept

under well controlled conditions (inside a gas-cell vessel), and this vessel is brought into the light entering the

spectrograph at the time of observations (analogous to the iodine method15 in the optical domain). The effect

of such a gas-cell is thus similar to the imprint of molecular features from the atmosphere, on the actual target

spectrum itself, but for selected (non-telluric) species and without the influences of the perturbing dynamical

processes in the atmosphere. By using a reference gas in the optical path shared with the light coming from the

astronomical target, wavelength calibration exposures can be recorded simultanously (the gas-cell is illuminated

by the target), or offline with a broadband calibration lamp. A detailed knowledge of the reference gas spectrum

is generally required, and precise line positions be known from laboratory measurements if absolute calibration

is desired. The gaseous absorption lines can then be used to track all instrumental instabilities and drifts that

follow the gas-cell in the optical chain. CRIRES has offered two such absorption gas cells for simultanous and

offline calibration. A CO cell to cover the CO bands around 2.1µm in the K-band, and a N2O gas-cell (Fig. 3)

with usable absorption features in selected ranges between 2.6 − 4.7µm.

While the latter approach is a viable option in the L- and M-bands, the range covered by N2O is very limited.

In the K-band, N2O transition bands are rather weak, while the prominent (and wider) bands in L and M are

easily saturated (and thus do not facilitate determination of accurate line positions nor profiles).

The lack of calibration sources in the NIR comparable to those in the visual regime poses a major challenge

to the exploitation of these wavelength regions using high-resolution spectroscopy. One of the goals of the

CRIRES+ project is to improve the current wavelength calibration situation. In an on-going effort, we seek

to provide enhanced wavelength reference sources for CRIRES+, both for general purpose calibration (of the

facility instrument modes) and for specialized applications (high-precision radial velocities in the NIR).

3. THE CRIRES+ PRECISION RADIAL VELOCITY GAS-CELL

The gas-cell wavelength calibration method is the only technique that provides a wavelength reference information

and enables monitoring of instrumental effects such as drifts in the dispersion relation and changes in slit

illumination simultaneously with the astronomical observation, both in time and co-located on the detector. This

means that the wavelength solution is recorded at the very same time and under the instantanous conditions

as the stellar light is recorded. Within the instrument, the exact same optical path is used for both the source

of wavelength reference and the celestial object, so that the spectral features of both contributions end up on

the same pixels in the focal plane. When modelled properly,15, 16 this approach allows for very high precision

(relative) wavelength calibration and long-term repeatability as needed for radial velocimetry work on the m/s

level.

For HARPS-type spectrographs, a high degree of illumination stability can be achieved by appropriately

feeding the instrument via optical fibers. As CRIRES is not a fiber-fed spectrograph, it is important to provide

a stable slit-illumination (aided by the adaptive optics), or to monitor the instrumental profile variations during

the observation, by the use of the gas-cell’s spectral lines.

For high-precision wavelength calibration with CRIRES+, we have developed a new NIR absorption gas-cell

primarily aimed at exoplanet precision Doppler experiments. The design considerations of the reference gas for

CRIRES+ are summarized as follows. The filling gas must provide a set of dense, homogenous and sharp spectral

lines over a wide wavelength range, as to provide a high density of information usable to construct the dispersion

relation. At the same time, the radial velocity information content15, 17, 18 of the stellar spectrum under study

must match the anticipated RV precision. This, in turn, is subject to a multitude of parameters, among them

attainable SNR of the target observations, availability of spectral features, ie. spectral type, wavelength range

and instrumental (spectral) resolution. One of the science drivers6 of CRIRES+ is the search of super-Earths

around low-mass stars, using the RV technique. To accomplish a ∼ 3 m/s level of RV precision for M-stars with

CRIRES+ in cross-dispersion, we identified a suitable reference gas that fulfills the requirements in the K-band.

Our choice of filling gas for the CRIRES+ short-path gas-cell is a compound of three molecular species. The

mixture is tailored to provide an optimum wavelength coverage in the H and K-bands, with an emphasis on a core

region in the K-band. The transmission spectrum is generated by acethylene (C2H2), ammonia (NH3), and an

isotopologue of methane (13CH4), and draws from the experience of a previous NH3 gas-cell for CRIRES,16 and

experiments with methane isotopologues on IRTF/CSHELL.19 Methane-13 (13CH4) features the carbon atom

with an additional neutron compared to naturally abundant methane (12CH4). The latter is a major contributor

to the telluric transmission spectrum, and could thus not be disentangled from a captive methane-12 held under

controlled conditions (ie. in the gas-cell). However, methane-13 has a different reduced mass due to the heavier

nucleus, responsible for shifting its rotational transitions significantly. Methane-13 is a stable isotopologue and is

easily distinguished from standard methane-12. An important point is also that methane has well characterized

absorption features with high frequency precision.20, 21 The partial pressures of the three molecular species are

listed in Table 1. We have optimized these for the CRIRES+ configuration (R = 105, ≥ 200 nm continous

wavelength coverage in the K-band, available path-length) to allow for the best “aspect ratio”, ie. the optimum

line-depth (∼ 80%) while retaining the smallest possible line-width (unresolved at R = 105).

3.1 Design and construction

The gas-cell is designed to utilize the maximum available clearance in front of the CRIRES+ instrument cryostat.

This renders the length of the cell vessel to be no longer than ≈ 18 cm (constrained by the telescope flange and

the instrument derotator), and hence also defines the optical path-length through the reference gas. The gas-cell

module is composed of a mounting structure and the actual gas-cell, with the latter being an all-glass cylinder

filled with the captive gas mixture. The primary design driver for the cell vessel are a) a longterm, gas-tight

sealing (10 years), and b) a high optical efficiency. Experiments have shown that standard viton seals and

glued windows cannot provide the long-term stability, and were therefore discarded. Instead, we chose the same





Figure 4. Filled gas-cell cylinder with fritted quartz windows, containing a mixture of 13CH4, NH3, C2H2. The “glas nose”

on the top middle of the cell is a remainder of the filling stem used to insert the gases.

material (quartz) for both the cylinder and windows, which allows for fritting them together with a glass mold to

form a seamless, homogenous joint. The optically polished low-OH quartz glass windows are anti-reflection coated

for the K-band, and mutually tilted with respect to each other so that internal fringing effects are minimized.

Filling the cell with the appropriate partial gas pressures is done after evacuating the cylinder to below 10−3 mbar

using a glass stem attached to the cylinder body. The mixture of gases is then achieved by subsequently flooding

the cell with the individual species, at the desired partial pressures. Figure 4 shows the sealed and filled gas-cell

cylinder.

Our tests over a period of four months have proven that the cell is well sealed, and no change in gas pressure

could be detected. Four glas-air interfaces by the two windows inevitably result in a reduced throughput of

the instrument. We measured the total transmission of the complete cell to be above 90% in the K-band, and

around 85% in the Y–H bands (on average, including windows and gas filling). This only marginally reduces the

efficiency of CRIRES+.

3.2 Gas-cell mount

CRIRES(+) features a calibration slide close to the VLT Nasmyth focal plane, before the light enters the derotator

and the adaptive optics module. This movable stage holds two slots for gas-cells with short optical path-length

that can be inserted directly into the optical beam. The spectral features of the reference gas is thus imprinted

onto the stellar light immediately after leaving the telescope. To host the sealed glas vessel in a defined and

reproducible location and orientation with respect to the telescope beam, we have designed a specialized mount

for the gas-cell (see Figure 5). The glass corpus is fixed in two rings, where four rubber padded screws each

Table 1. Molecular species and their partial pressures for the CRIRES+ precision radial velocity gas-cell. The total

pressure of the filled cell is ∼ 300 mbar, with a path-length of 18 cm. The fourth column denotes the average line-width

of the corresponding species, as measured from high-resolution spectra. In the last column, t gives the percentage of

wavelength coverage with usable absorption features deeper than 10% from the gas mixture, for each of the JHK band

range definitions.

Molecule

Pressure

line-width

t

[mbar]

[km/s]

[%]

Acethylene

12C2H2

∼ 60

1.791 ± 0.010

K: ∼ 76%

Ammonia

14NH3

∼ 90

1.978 ± 0.011

H: ∼ 67%

Methane

13CH4

∼ 150

1.797 ± 0.022

J: < 10%





Figure 5. Design of the CRIRES+ short gas-cell mount. The fragile glass cylinder is held in a stress-free configuration.

Side view (left) and cut front view (right). Parts are labelled as follows: protective aluminum shells (1-2), gas-cell cylinder

(3), mounting posts and ring fixtures (4, 8), straylight removal masks (5-6), dust protection caps (7), stress-free alignment

(9-11), and locking mechanism (12-14).

hold and align the cylinder almost free of stress. This proved especially important during shipping and handling

to prevent cracks or breakage of the glass and seals, and ensures long-term endurance under changing ambient

conditions. Two aluminum half-shells further protect the cell mechanically and provide shielding from external

straylight.

3.3 Laboratory FTS measurements

A prototype gas-cell has been successfully built and filled. We have started to characterize its transmission

spectrum by means of a Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS). Spectra of the gas-cell were recorded with

a Bruker IFS125HR device at a resolution between 0.04 − 0.0065 cm−1 (corresponding to resolving powers of

250 000 − 1 538 000 at 1 µm). The cell is measured at an ambient pressure < 0.1 mbar to supress the athmospheric

contributions by water vapor etc. within the instrument. A blackbody-like continuum lamp is used to illuminate

the gas-cell. Normalized spectra of the H and K-bands are on display in Figures 6 and 7, respectively.

In the H-band (1.47 − 1.83µm), the strongest absorption features in the cell’s spectrum (Figure 6, bottom

panel) originate from acethylene in two very deep (∼ 90%) bands around 1.53µm. Similarly prominent contribu-

tions in the neighbouring range (1.5µm) are a set of ammonia lines, partly mixed with acethylene. The largest

wavelength range in this band, starting at 1.63µm, is covered by deep (≤ 80%) line systems from methane-13,

with minor contributions by ammonia. Overall, the line coverage of the three gases in the H-band is quite

complete, with only a small gap around 1.6µm. The upper panels in Figure 6 show FTS spectra of the individual

gases ammonia, acethylene, and methane-13. These are measured separately under different ambient conditions,

and include some water vapor contributions from a normal athmosphere during the experiment (in the case

of NH3 and C2H2). Note that the individual species have lower gas pressures than present in the prototype

gas-cell (Table 1). For guidance, the top panel in Figure 6 gives the telluric spectrum of the same FTS setup as

measured with the gas-cell, and represents the ambient air from the optical path between source and detector.

Note that this telluric spectrum is much weaker and cleaner than a corresponding spectrum measured through

Earth’s athmosphere with the VLT, due to the much smaller path-length. The shaded areas in Figure 6 denote

wavelength ranges outside the H-band definitions.

Our FTS measurements of the K-band (1.95 − 2.4µm) are plotted in Figure 7. This is the wavelength range

for which the gas pressures of ammonia and methane-13 are designed to provide the optimum line depths.

Acethylene (third panel from top) has only very weak bands in this range and does not add significantly to

Figure 6. Laboratory FTS measurements of the CRIRES+ gas-cell species in the H-band. Plotted from top to bottom are

the ambient athmosphere (mostly contributions by wator-vapor, as present during the gas-cell measurement), ammonia

and acethylene gas (both including residual water vapor in the setup), methane-13, and the compound gas-cell mixture

as measured from the filled CRIRES+ cell.

Figure 7. K-band measurements of the filled CRIRES+ gas-cell and its individual species. See Figure 6.

Figure 8. K-band regions with transition bands by ammonia (top, blue), acethylene (middle, pink), and methane-13

(bottom, green) as measured with the filled CRIRES+ cell. Also shown in detail are single line profiles of the corresponding

molecule (right panels). In all three regions, some smaller lines from the other two molecules may be present, respectively,

as the wavelength regions of their absorption features partly overlap. The line profiles are mostly resolved at the resolution

of these FTS measurements (R = 1 538 000), yet for CRIRES+ (R = 100 000) will qualify as largely unresolved.

the spectrum of the mixture (bottom panel). The major constituent in the K-band is methane-13, achieving

large line-depths of more than 95% in the high-resolution FTS spectra. The central part of the band is further

populated by strong ammonia lines, which also has features at around 2.0µm and below. In the K-band, the

coverage with reference gas lines is complete but for a ∼ 30nm range at 2.1µm. In total, more than 75% of the

entire K-band are populated with suitable gas lines deeper than 10% by any of the three reference gas species.

The prototype CRIRES+ gas-cell demonstrates the power of the selected gas mixture in the H and K-bands.

For the remaining operating wavelength domains of CRIRES+, other wavelength reference sources are foreseen

(Section 4).

To achieve the demanding RV precision of CRIRES+ in the K-band, the spectral lines exploited for wavelength

calibration must enable a highly accurate measurement of their line positions. This immediately translates into

sharp, unresolved reference lines at the given resolving power (R = 105) of CRIRES+. Our gas-cell mixture is

designed such that the line-widths of all three molecules is smaller than 3 km/s, corresponding to the resolution

element of CRIRES+. We measured the line-widths in the FTS spectra with the highest attainable resolution

for all three gases in selected, strong absorption bands. At ∆λ = 0.0065 cm−1 (R = 1 538 000) these lines are well

discernible for 13CH4, NH3, and C2H2 (though numerous are blended, particularly in 13CH4). Line-widths are

typically closely distributed around 2 km/s (cf. Table 1), with very similar average widths of 1.797±0.022 km s−1,

1.978 ± 0.011 km s−1, and 1.791 ± 0.010 km s−1 (for 13CH4, NH3, and C2H2, respectively). Figure 8 shows these

transmission features in narrow regions of the K-band separately for all three constituents, and also illustrates

corresponding typical line profiles.

4. WAVELENGTH CALIBRATION STRATEGY FOR CRIRES+

CRIRES+ will be a facility instrument at the VLT, addressing a large variety of scientific questions. Appropriate

wavelength calibration sources must be provided for the entire working range of the spectrograph (0.95 − 5.3µm).

Moreover, wavelength calibration needs to support all observing modes of CRIRES+. In combination with

the limited wavelength coverage of the individual sources, this leads to a number of constraints the CRIRES+

calibration plan must match:

1. The existing HCL techniques as well as the gas-cells (including the new CRIRES+ cell) cannot operate in

polarimetry mode. This is a result of the opto-mechanical layout, where all calibration devices are located

on a movable stage in front of the Nasmyth focus. At the same time, the polarimeter unit7 is also located

on the same stage, and thus cannot be inserted at the same time as the gas-cells or the HCL fiber-feeds.

2. The ThAr HCL is only suitable for the Y–K bands (see Section 2).

3. The available and new gas-cells lack broadband coverage in, or do not operate in the Y–J and L–M bands.

4. The available techniques in the L–M bands are not satisfactory (Section 2).

We address these issues by expanding the suite of calibration sources for CRIRES+. The concept for calibrators

comprises the following changes and additions. First, the ThAr HCL will be superseded by an UNe HCL.

The characteristics of UNe have recently been studied, and prove to be very comparable to ThAr. A major

advantage of UNe is that it provides significantly more lines (three to five times) in the NIR, and thus increases

the suitability of the HCL method for CRIRES+ in the J, H, and K-bands. UNe catalogs22–24 are now available

with line lists covering the Y–L bands. These HCLs are readily available and their line density is suitable for

CRIRES+ as a general purpose calibrator up to (including) the K-band, where the transmission of commercially

availabe UNe bulbs, due to the quartz window, in combination with standard optical fibers breaks down. The

implementation of the UNe HCL in CRIRES+ (aided by the cross-dispersed spectral format) will significantly

improve the dispersion solution.

Secondly, to enable wavelength calibration for polarimetric observations, an additional reference source with

high stability coverage is considered. Etalons provide a homogenously spaced set of lines, where the line sharpness

(“finesse”) and contrast can be controlled by the quality and reflectivity of the reflective coating. At the same

time, the peak-to-peak distance (free spectral range) is a function of the cavity length. This allows to tune the

free spectral range to the resolution of the instrument. For CRIRES+, we are developing stabilized Fabry-Pérot

étalons to provide suitable offline calibration lines over the entire NIR range. Two etalon units are studied, where

their usable wavelength range is driven by the availability of suitable broadband cavity coatings. Although a small

finesse (∼ 10) satisfies a level of 5 m/s calibration precision, a broadband performance over several NIR bands (eg.

YJ and HK) is not easily achieved. Furthermore, challenges include achieving the necessary long-term stability

of such a unit. The stability is directly linked to the temperature stability of the etalon, and thus demands for

an actively controlled environment inside a vacuum tank. For CRIRES+, fiber-fed étalons are under study. This

poses stringent requirements on the etalon illumination and its stability by the optical fibers. A quasi-continuum

laser-driven light source (LDLS) is used to provide the necessary white-light to the etalon. These FP étalons are

compatible with the CRIRES+ polarimetric modes when the calibration light is fed into the optical path before

the movable stage, where the polarimeter is mounted on. This can be accomplished by exploiting the existing

calibration unit outside of the telescope beam. The output light of that unit is redirected into the beam by a

folding mirror, before the movable stage. To obtain an absolute wavelength solution with the etalon, the UNe

HCL will be employed as a reference. This is because the line-position of the etalon peaks is not known a priori

(albeit their relative positions are), but can be assigned by comparison with a HCL line. The development of

an etalon for CRIRES+ will significantly enhance its dispersion solution across the entire spectral format, by

providing homogenously and densely distributed reference lines. With a dedicated and optimized etalon unit,

this technique may also overcome the lack of calibrators in the L and M-bands.

In a third approach, we are also seeking to further advance the gas-cell design and to expand the spectral

coverage beyond the H and K-bands. Absorption gas-cells with an increased optical path-length to several meters

are under study. Such a cell could be operated with filling gases at much lower pressures, yielding significantly

reduced line-widths for gasous species that at short path-lengths a) provide unsuitably broad spectral lines, or

b) have too weak absorption features due to small absorption coefficients.

The CRIRES+ suite of wavelength reference sources also comprises the existing N2O gas-cell for use in

selected L&M wavelength ranges. Also supported are the established methods of using sky lines and telluric

lines to construct the dispersion solution in wavelength domains where applicable (cf. Section 2).

5. CONCLUSION

The CRIRES+ project will upgrade VLT/CRIRES into a cross-dispersed, high-efficiency NIR spectrograph at a

resolving power of 105. New capabilities such as high-precision radial velocity measurements on low-mass stars

and polarimetric observations call for new and improved wavelength calibration techniques across the operating

domain from 1 − 5µm.

To satisfy the corresponding requirements, we have developed a new CRIRES+ absorption gas-cell specifically

tailored to enable RV experiments with M-stars on the 3 m/s level in the K-band. We have designed, built, and

characterized a prototype gas-cell for CRIRES+ filled with a compound of ammonia, acethylene, and methane-

13 molecular species. This cell provides a forest of absorption lines in the H and K-bands for simultaneous

wavelength calibration, evidenced in high-resolution FTS spectra. Our data show that the population of lines

covers a high fraction of the bandpasses, and that the gas line-widths are smaller than can be resolved with

CRIRES+, thus providing high-precision wavelength markers.

We have also outlined the wavelength calibration strategy and our developments to expand the suite of

frequency calibration sources for CRIRES+. This includes an improved UNe-HCL over ThAr, the new gas-cell

for precision applications, and the design of Fabry-Pérot étalons to cover the Y–M bands. The set of advanced

wavelength calibrators will enable CRIRES+ to explore the NIR regime in unprecedented detail.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The CRIRES+ consortium acknowledges funding from the German federal ministry of education and research

(BMBF) and the Wallenberg foundation, Sweden.

REFERENCES

[1] Oliva, Ernesto et al., “Concept and optical design of the cross-disperser module for CRIRES+,” Proceedings

of the SPIE, 9147-289 (2014).

[2] Lizon, Jean-Louis et al., “Opto-mechanical design of a new cross dispersion unit for the CRIRES+ high

resolution spectrograph for the VLT,” Proceedings of the SPIE, 9147-290 (2014).

[3] Käufl, H.-U., Ballester, P., Biereichel, P., Delabre, B., Donaldson, R., Dorn, R., Fedrigo, E., Finger, G.,

Fischer, G., Franza, F., Gojak, D., Huster, G., Jung, Y., Lizon, J.-L., Mehrgan, L., Meyer, M., Moorwood,

A., Pirard, J.-F., Paufique, J., Pozna, E., Siebenmorgen, R., Silber, A., Stegmeier, J., and Wegerer, S.,

“CRIRES: a high-resolution infrared spectrograph for ESO’s VLT,” in [Society of Photo-Optical Instrumen-

tation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series], Moorwood, A. F. M. and Iye, M., eds., Society of Photo-Optical

Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 5492, 1218–1227 (Sept. 2004).

[4] Paufique, J., Biereichel, P., Donaldson, R., Delabre, B., Fedrigo, E., Franza, F., Gigan, P., Gojak, D.,

Hubin, N. N., Kasper, M. E., Kaeufl, H.-U., Lizon, J.-L., Oberti, S., Pirard, J.-F., Pozna, E., Santos, J.,

and Stroebele, S., “MACAO-CRIRES: a step toward high-resolution spectroscopy,” in [Advancements in

Adaptive Optics], Bonaccini Calia, D., Ellerbroek, B. L., and Ragazzoni, R., eds., Society of Photo-Optical

Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 5490, 216–227 (Oct. 2004).

[5] Dorn, R. J., Finger, G., Huster, G., Kaeufl, H.-U., Lizon, J.-L., Mehrgan, L., Meyer, M., Pirard, J.-F.,

Silber, A., Stegmeier, J., and Moorwood, A. F. M., “The CRIRES InSb megapixel focal plane array detector

mosaic,” in [Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series], Garnett, J. D.

and Beletic, J. W., eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series

5499, 510–517 (Sept. 2004).

[6] Follert, Roman et al., “CRIRES+: a cross-dispersed high resolution infrared spectrograph for the ESO

VLT,” Proceedings of the SPIE, 9147-44 (2014).

[7] Lockhart, Matthew et al., “Novel infrared polarimeter for the ESO CRIRES+ instrument,” Proceedings of

the SPIE, 9147-329 (2014).

[8] Kerber, F., Nave, G., Sansonetti, C. J., and Bristow, P., “From laboratory to the sky: Th-Ar wavelength

standards for the cryogenic infrared echelle spectrograph (CRIRES),” Physica Scripta Volume T 134, 014007

(May 2009).

[9] Palmer, B. A. and Engleman, R., [Atlas of the Thorium spectrum] (1983).

[10] Lovis, C. and Pepe, F., “A new list of thorium and argon spectral lines in the visible,” A&A 468, 1115–1121

(June 2007).

[11] Kerber, F., Nave, G., and Sansonetti, C. J., “The Spectrum of Th-Ar Hollow Cathode Lamps in the 691-5804

nm region: Establishing Wavelength Standards for the Calibration of Infrared Spectrographs,” ApJS 178,

374–381 (Oct. 2008).

[12] Rousselot, P., Lidman, C., Cuby, J.-G., Moreels, G., and Monnet, G., “Night-sky spectral atlas of OH

emission lines in the near-infrared,” A&A 354, 1134–1150 (Feb. 2000).

[13] Abrams, M. C., Davis, S. P., Rao, M. L. P., Engleman, Jr., R., and Brault, J. W., “High-resolution Fourier

transform spectroscopy of the Meinel system of OH,” ApJS 93, 351–395 (July 1994).

[14] Figueira, P., Pepe, F., Melo, C. H. F., Santos, N. C., Lovis, C., Mayor, M., Queloz, D., Smette, A., and

Udry, S., “Radial velocities with CRIRES. Pushing precision down to 5-10 m/s,” A&A 511, A55 (Feb.

2010).

[15] Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., Williams, E., McCarthy, C., Dosanjh, P., and Vogt, S. S., “Attaining Doppler

Precision of 3 M s-1,” PASP 108, 500 (June 1996).

[16] Bean, J. L., Seifahrt, A., Hartman, H., Nilsson, H., Wiedemann, G., Reiners, A., Dreizler, S., and Henry,

T. J., “The CRIRES Search for Planets Around the Lowest-mass Stars. I. High-precision Near-infrared

Radial Velocities with an Ammonia Gas Cell,” ApJ 713, 410–422 (Apr. 2010).

[17] Bouchy, F., Pepe, F., and Queloz, D., “Fundamental photon noise limit to radial velocity measurements,”

A&A 374, 733–739 (Aug. 2001).

[18] Reiners, A., Bean, J. L., Huber, K. F., Dreizler, S., Seifahrt, A., and Czesla, S., “Detecting Planets Around

Very Low Mass Stars with the Radial Velocity Method,” ApJ 710, 432–443 (Feb. 2010).

[19] Anglada-Escudé, G., Plavchan, P., Mills, S., Gao, P., Garc´ıa-Berr´ıos, E., Lewis, N. S., Sung, K., Ciardi, D.,

Beichman, C., Brinkworth, C., Johnson, J., Davison, C., White, R., and Prato, L., “Design and Construction

of Absorption Cells for Precision Radial Velocities in the K Band Using Methane Isotopologues,” PASP 124,

586–597 (June 2012).

[20] Nai-Cheng, S., Yao-Xiang, W., Yi-Min, S., Cheng-Yang, L., Xue-Bin, Z., and Chu, W., “Iodine and Methane

Stabilized He-Ne Lasers as Wavelength Standards,” in [Precision Measurement and Fundamental Constants],

Taylor, B. N. and Phillips, W. D., eds., 77 (Aug. 1981).

[21] Boudon, V., Champion, J.-P., Gabard, T., Loëte, M., Coustenis, A., de Bergh, C., Bézard, B., Lellouch,

E., Drossart, P., Hirtzig, M., Negr˜ao, A., and Griffith, C. A., “Methane in Titan’s atmosphere: from

fundamental spectroscopy to planetology,” Europhysics News 40, 17–20 (July 2009).

[22] Redman, S. L., Lawler, J. E., Nave, G., Ramsey, L. W., and Mahadevan, S., “The Infrared Spectrum of

Uranium Hollow Cathode Lamps from 850 nm to 4000 nm: Wavenumbers and Line Identifications from

Fourier Transform Spectra,” ApJS 195, 24 (Aug. 2011).

[23] Redman, S. L., Ycas, G. G., Terrien, R., Mahadevan, S., Ramsey, L. W., Bender, C. F., Osterman, S. N.,

Diddams, S. A., Quinlan, F., Lawler, J. E., and Nave, G., “A High-resolution Atlas of Uranium-Neon in the

H Band,” ApJS 199, 2 (Mar. 2012).

[24] Sarmiento, Luis-Fernando, Reiners, Ansgar, Seemann, Ulf et al., “Characterizing UNe hollow cathode lamps

at NIR wavelengths for the CARMENES survey,” Proceedings of the SPIE, 9147-194 (2014).





